---
layout: single
title: "I live by the Dao."
date: 2025-04-20
tags: dao
---

### I am a Daoist. I can not tell you what it is. But I can tell what it is not.

- #### Daoism is not Zen Buddhism.

The idea of non-duality ([Advaita](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Advaita_Vedanta)) is the main pillar of both Buddism and Daoism.
It means that the world as we see it is an interplay of the opposites (good/bad, big/small, yin/yang...),
yet these opposites are fundamentally connected.
Left does not make sense without right. So there is something that is above this all and it never changes.
But it is neither good, nor bad. Neither big, nor small. Yin-yang as one.

Buddhism claims that this is the reason to withdraw yourself from such reality, which is merely an illusion.
Nirvana is not heaven, but the extinguishing of passions.
An endless vacation from the hard work of trying to keep everything together.
Which was a blessing for a person living 2500 years ago.

Daoism does not make such claim. Reality does not collapse because of being called an illusion.
Love is awesome, pasta is tasty, russians are awful.
But you still need to balance all these things till the day you die.
If your life is plain insufferable, then of course it is better to meditate than to kill yourself.
Otherwise, why not just, you know... live it?

- #### Daoism is not a set of rules.

When the only constant is the change, the only rule is there is no rules.
The Dao has its pace. It creates and destroys, it flows.
It already does what it does, and you can't change this.

Nothing knows how to live the life better than the life itself.
4 billion years of battling molecular structures led to the creation of cells and organisms
that are rather resilient and sustainable than fragile and unstable.

Your hunger is meant for you to know when to eat.
Your anger is meant for you to know when someone crosses your border.
Your fear is meant for you to avoid threats.
Sometimes feelings can deceive you. That is where the knowledge and wisdom should tell you what to do.

There are no clues other than that. The world is phenomenal for everyone.
Either you do how you feel, or you do how someone feels, because nobody can truly know.
So there is no point in not following your dreams or not avoiding your nightmares.

- #### Daoism is not Nihilism.

Thanks God, life is also paradoxical. If there are no rules, you can do whatever. Even follow the rules.
Living by the Dao means doing what naturally comes next. Doing what is needed, if you will.
If something falls, you pick it up. If something breaks, you fix it.
If someone is being hurt, you defend them. And if you are tired, you sit down and chill.

Life is tough by itself. It was always a crisis, a struggle for resources.
Combined with the climate change, nuclear weapons, AI and social media, it can soon turn into catastrophe.
It does not matter if we can avoid it. It does not matter if the apocalypse is tomorrow or yesterday.
Chop wood, carry water.

Do your thing. Do what is needed. Try as hard as possible.
And if with all your might and will you still can not do it,
then you need to accept the failure and move on with it.

Peace. Democracy. Science. Feminism. Tolerance. This is the way.

Fuck you, russians, for trying to take this from me. I will never forgive.

<h4>Ukraine is struggling against Russian aggression right now!</h4>
<a href="https://savelife.in.ua/en/donate-en/">Make a donation to Ukrainian Army (Come Back Alive)</a>
<br>
<a href="https://u24.gov.ua/">Make a humanitarian donation (United 24)</a>